[torproject.2-vidalia-help-bridges-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/bridges.po
source_file = templates/bridges.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-links-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/links.po
source_file = templates/links.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-netview-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/netview.po
source_file = templates/netview.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.2-vidalia-help-running-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/running.po
source_file = templates/running.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.2-vidalia-help-troubleshooting-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/troubleshooting.po
source_file = templates/troubleshooting.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-config-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/config.po
source_file = templates/config.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-log-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/log.po
source_file = templates/log.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-index-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/index.po
source_file = templates/index.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-server-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/server.po
source_file = templates/server.pot
source_lang = en

[torproject.3-vidalia-help-services-pot]
file_filter = <lang>/services.po
source_file = templates/services.pot
source_lang = en

[main]
host = https://www.transifex.net

